#summary Shows how to create a minimal Cocoa# Hello World application.

Learn how to write your first minimalist [CocoaSharp Cocoa#] application to get you started quickly.

=helloworld.nib=
For rapid interface development, Cocoa uses .nib files.
	1. Start *Interface Builder*. In Finder, select harddrive > Developer > Applications > Interface Builder
	1. Create a new .nib file. Make sure Cocoa > *Application* is selected (the default), choose a language you like and click on *New*.
	1. In the *Untitled* window, select *Window*.
	1. Select *Tools* > *Show Inspector* (Or press Shift+Cmd+I).
	1. Change the *Window Title* to *Hello World*.
	1. Save it as *helloworld.nib*. Mono/Cocoa# runs only on OS X 10.3 and later, therefore *10.2 and later format* will do.

=helloworld.cs=
Save the following C# code as *helloworld.cs*.
{{{
using Cocoa;

class HelloWorld {
   static void Main() {
      Application.Init();
      Application.LoadNib("helloworld.nib");
      Application.Run();
   }
}
}}}
	1. Open a text editor. In Finder, select Programs > *TextEdit*.
	1. If using TextEdit, select *Format* > *Make Plain Text*.
	1. Copy-and-paste the above C# code.
	1. Save the file as *helloworld.cs*.
||Make sure it's actually called *helloworld.cs* and not *helloworld.cs.txt*||

=helloworld.exe=
Compile your C# source code to a CLR assembly.
	1. Open the *Terminal*. In Finder, select Programs > Utilities > Terminal.
	1. If necessary, change to the correct directory.
	1. Type:
{{{
mcs -pkg:cocoa-sharp -out:helloworld.exe helloworld.cs
}}}

=HelloWorld.app=
In order to launch the application, you need to bundle the assembly and the .nib file together with a launcher and an info file. For your convenience you can use the *macpack* utility.
	1. At the Terminal type:
{{{
macpack -m:2 -n:HelloWorld -o:. -a:helloworld.exe -r:helloworld.nib
}}}
||If HelloWorld.app already exists you need to remove it using rm -rf HelloWorld.app.||

You can now double-click on *HelloWorld* in Finder to start your Hello World application= 

=Next Steps=
See the SimpleTutorial.
